.TH GROK 1L
.SH NAME
grok \- Desktop Database Manager and GUI Builder
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grok
[-h] [-d] [-v] [-t] [-T] [-p] [-f] [\fIform\fR [\fIquery\fR]]

.B grok
-x | -X \fIform\fR \fItemplate\fR[\fIflags\fR] [\fIquery\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B grok
is a database manager that displays two-dimensional databases using a
card file paradigm. A GUI builder is available to create user-defined
applications. Grok comes with a number of pre-built applications such
as a phone directory, todo lists, and a sample country database. The
form to display (\fIphone\fR, \fItodo\fR, \fIcountries\fR, etc.) can
be given as the first parameter. This manual page describes the command
line options of
.BR grok .
For information on how to use
.BR grok ,
refer to the on-line help pages, and to the PostScript or TeX manual.
.LP
.SS OPTIONS
.IP \-h
List available options.
.IP \-d
Print default Qt Style Sheet and exit. The output can be written to
~/.grok/grok.qss or passed in using -stylesheet.  The style sheet
adjusts fonts, colors, and some other GUI appearance defaults.  The
grok.qss replaces the defaults, and the command-line option augments and
overrides the defaults.
.IP \-v
Print the program version and patchlevel and exit.
.IP \-t
Requires specification of a form. Without a query string, prints all
cards to stdout in the same format that is used for the summary window
in interactive mode. If a query is also specified, print only cards that
satisfy the query expression (see below). The form may have a default
query built in.
.IP \-T
This option is equivalent to -t, but omits the header line.
.IP \-p
This option is equivalent to -t, but prints the data in a format readable
by the \fIplan\fR calendar program (see www.bitrot.de/plan.html). The
format is a colon-separated list: date/time, length, early warn, late
warn, day repeat, end date, color, note, message, script, suspend flag,
no-time flag, and no-alarm flag. Colons, newlines, and backslashes in
fields are escaped with a backslash. If no query string is given, the
default plan query defined in the form is used.
.IP \-x
Evaluates the given
.I template
and returns the results to standard output.  This provides much more
control over output format than the -t, -T, and -p options.
.IP \-X
Output the given
.I template
to standard output without evaluating.  Mostly useful for printing the
built-in automatic templates.  Least useful for printing
.I +
(standard input); use 
.I cat
for that.
.IP \-f
Don't fork on startup. This is useful for debugging.
.IP form
Specifies the database to display.
.B Grok
distinguishes forms and databases. Both always come in pairs. The form
defines the representation of the cards and the database provides the raw
data. If no form is specified, one can be chosen in interactive mode. The
-t, -T, and -p options require a form argument.
.IP query
If the form has a built-in query, it is used to select which cards in the
database to display initially. If there is no default query, all cards are
displayed. The query argument can be used to override the default query.
This option should always be quoted with single quotes to keep the shell
from interpreting the query string.
.IP template
The available templates are the built-in \fBhtml\fR, \fBtext\fR, and
\fBfancytext\fR templates, as well as any user-created templates for
the database.  The template may also be
.I +
to read the template from standard input.
.IP flags
Template flags a-z are normally all unset.  They may be set by
appending a dash (\fB-\fR) and then the flag letter to the template name.
Any number of flags may be set in this way.
.LP
There are different types of queries: '*' selects all cards, '/string'
performs a case-insensitive string search, '{expr}' selects all cards for
which the string expression returns a non-null, non-'f' string, and '(expr)'
selects all cards for which the numerical expression returns nonzero. The
leading '/' in string searches is optional. For a detailed description of
query expressions, refer to the "Expression Grammar" item in the help
pulldown, or to the PostScript user's manual.
.LP
In addition to these options,
.B grok
supports the usual Qt options such as -stylesheet. The -qwindowgeometry and
-geometry options should not be used to preset a window size; grok
determines and frequently adjusts its own size.
.SH EXAMPLES
.LP
\fBgrok\fR
.LP
Start up grok with no form. The Database pulldown can be used to choose one.
.LP
\fBgrok phone\fR
.LP
Start up grok with the \fIphone\fR form. Perform that form's default query
if it has one.
.LP
\fBgrok phone '/thomas'\fR
.LP
Start up grok with the \fIphone\fR form. Ignore the default query and
select only cards that contain the word "thomas". Case is ignored.
.LP
\fBgrok -t phone '/thomas'\fR
.LP
Print all cards of the form \fIphone\fR to stdout that contain the string
"thomas". Do not start the interactive user interface.
.LP
\fBgrok phone '({_group == "f"} && {_email != ""})'\fR
.LP
Start up grok with the \fIphone\fR form. Ignore the default query and
select only cards that describe friends that have an email address.
.SH FILES
.LP
.IP *.gf 18
Files ending with the extension .gf are assumed to contain
.B grok
forms.
.IP *.db 18
Unless the form specifies otherwise, the database that provides the raw
data for a form has the same path and name as the form, but with the
extension .db. Procedural databases have no extension.
.IP . 18
The current directory is searched first for form files.
.IP ./grokdir 18
The grokdir current directory is searched next for form files. This is
done to allow
.B grok
to be started from the source distribution directory for evaluation.
.IP ~/.grok 18
By default, all forms and databases are stored here. By convention, all
private forms and databases are stored here. This directory is searched
after . and ./grokdir.
.IP ${GROK_LIB}/grokdir 18
This directory is searched last. It is supposed to contain forms visible
to all users of a system. Only one user should have write permission.
.IP ~/.grok/.grokrc 18
Preferences and the current configuration of
.B grok.
.IP ${GROK_BIN}/grok
The
.B grok
executable. This should be in the user's search path. Form files are set
up so they can be "executed" by feeding themselves to
.B grok,
as long as
.B grok
is in the search path $PATH.
.IP ${GROK_LIB}/grok.hlp
All help texts used by the
.B grok
help system.
.SS AUTHOR
Thomas Driemeyer <thomas@bitrot.de>, with Qt port and additional
features by Thomas J. Moore
.LP
Please report issues at https://github.com/darktjm/grok/issues.
Always include your
.B grok
version as reported by "grok -v" in your mail. New forms for inclusion in
the distribution are welcome. Make sure that your email address is in the
form's comment field, and that there is some help information attached to
the form with the Def Help function.

